---
title: Big O Notation
category: literature
layout: post
---

# Stacks

<video width="640" height="480" autoPlay controls controlsList="nofullscreen nodownload novolume" >
  <source type="video/mp4" src="{{ site.markdown_url }}/1-stacks/stack.mp4"></source>
  <p>Your browser does not support the video element.</p>
</video>


## I need a metaphor!

Imagine a stack of books. You could pile on more books on top. The last ones you put are the first ones to go out should you need it.

## Examples of when to use a stack

Undo / redo in a document. Every action will get pushed or popped

## How well does a stack perform?

* Finding an item: ```O(n)```
* Inserting an item: `O(1)`
* Deleting an item: `O(1)`


## What operations can you do with a stack?

* push, pop, find
* Remember, you cannot insert or delete from anywhere but the end

## Stacks are LIFO

* LIFO - Last in First Out

## Why is it O(1) time to insert something. Don't you have to go through n elements before you do an insertion?

We're not talking about the entire process of finding and then inserting.
Since you already know the index (location) of where to **push** the last item,
all it takes is a simple insertion at that index. Which is constant.


Here's another way to think about it. If you had a stack of length 100 and you
wanted to **push** a new item. Would you have to look at every single item of the list
to do your insertion if you already know the index of the item? No. You would simply do

```python
my_stack[100] = 'new item'
```

## What does this look like in code?

```python
my_stack = new Stack()
my_stack.push('Anna')
my_stack.push('Bea')
my_stack.push('Candy')

print(my_stack) # will look like ['Anna', 'Bea', 'Candy']

my_stack.pop()

print(my_stack) # will look like ['Anna', 'Bea']
```

## Wait is a stack just a list?

Not really. You could use a python list to implement (create) a stack, but a stack only has
2 main methods. Push and poYou could use a list as a stack in this way.

```python
my_stack = []
my_stack.append('Anna')
my_stack.append('Bea')
my_stack.append('Candy')

print(my_stack) # will look like ['Anna', 'Bea', 'Candy']

my_stack.pop()

print(my_stack) # will look like ['Anna', 'Bea']
```


## Summary

* Stacks are last in, first out. You "push" (add) or "pop" (remove) with a stack
You only push/pop from the end of the stack
